# MHCII immunopeptidome analysis

## Overview

This folder provides code for the analysis of an immunopeptidomic dataset. The pipeline identifies and visualizes peptides mapped to presented antigen genes and performs pathway enrichment analysis on genes uniquely represented in the MHCII tumor-high peptidome.

### Maintainer
**Aleksandra Shabanova**

## Folder Structure

- **`01_Peptide_presence_analysis.ipynb`**  
  - Identifies peptides mapped to significantly correlated antigen genes across TCGA, scRNA-seq, and GeoMx cohorts tumor fraction.
  - Generates a heatmap showing the number of peptides per gene per patient.
  - Selects genes uniquely mapped to the MHCII peptidome of four MHCII tumor-high samples and saves them to a `shared_genes_only_high_based_on_prop.txt` file.

- **`02_Enrichment.Rmd`**  
  - Performs pathway enrichment analysis on the selected genes using the `enrichR` package.
  - Outputs the top overrepresented pathways from chosen databases.

- **03_Filter_healthy_antigen_presentation.ipynb**
  - Filters genes whose peptides are presented in healthy ovary tissue
  - Saves filtered gene list as txt


- **04_PRISM_Deconv_analysis_of_antigen_gene_exp.Rmd**
  - Analyses expression values for 35 genes of interest across tumor and immune-stromal fractions generated by PRISM deconvolution of bulk RNAseq, calculates median scaled expression and z-scores for the tumor and immune-stromal compartments in three patients group: high, mid and low (each contains 4/12 samples). Additionally, gene expression specificity to the tumor fraction in the high group and fold change in tumor fraction expression (high vs. mean of low and mid groups) are computed.
  - Generates summary as csv file, relevant plots as pdfs.

## Usage

### Prerequisites

- **Software**
  - Python
  - R
  - Required R package: `enrichR`

### Quick Start

1. **Peptide Mapping and Visualization**  
   Run `01_Peptide_presence_analysis.ipynb` to generate:
   - A heatmap (e.g., Fig. 6f) showing peptide presence by gene and patient.
   - A `shared_genes_only_high_based_on_prop.txt` file with genes uniquely found in the MHCII tumor-high peptidome.

2. **Pathway Enrichment**  
   Run `02_Enrichment.Rmd` using the `shared_genes_only_high_based_on_prop.txt` file generated in step 1 to obtain enriched pathways (e.g., Supplementary Figure 6 a and b).

3. **Filtering of healthy tissue antigen presnetation**
   Run  **03_Filter_healthy_antigen_presentation.ipynb** using `shared_genes_only_high_based_on_prop.txt` to receive filtered gene list.
  
4. Analyse RNA expression of antigens across tumor and immune-stromal fractions in three patient groups
   Run  **04_PRISM_Deconv_analysis_of_antigen_gene_exp.Rmd** to study the expression values and generate:
    - Summary table for Supplementary Table 11.
    - Heatmap of Z-scores, Specificity loliplot and Fold change bubble plot (Fig.6g-i) .
